## Papers

### [Balancing privacy rights and the production of high-quality satellite imagery](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.est.0c02365)

Coffer, M. (2020). Balancing privacy rights and the production of high-quality satellite imagery. _Environmental Science & Technology_. 54 (11), 6453-6455. DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.0c02365.

### An investigation into the usability of commercial satellite imagery forseagrass mapping

Coffer, M., Schaeffer, B., Zimmerman, R., Hill, V., & Li, J. (2020). An investigation into the usability of commercial satellite imagery for seagrass mapping. _Remote Sensing of the Environment_. (_In Press_).


### Quantifying national and regional cyanobacterial occurrence in US lakes using satellite remote sensing. 

**Coffer, M.**, Schaeffer, B., Darling, J., Urquhart, E., & Salls, W. (2019). Quantifying national and regional cyanobacterial occurrence in US lakes using satellite remote sensing. _Ecological Indicators_. (_In Review_).

Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms are the most common form of harmful algal blooms in freshwater systems throughout the world. However, _in situ_ sampling of cyanobacteria in inland lakes is limited both spatially and temporally. Satellite data has proven to be an effective tool to monitor cyanobacteria in freshwater lakes across the United States. This study uses data from the European Space Agency Envisat MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer and the Sentinel-3 Ocean and Land Color Instrument to provide a national overview of the percentage of lakes experiencing a cyanobacterial bloom on a weekly basis for 2008-2011, 2017, and 2018. A total of 2,321 lakes across the contiguous United States were included in the analysis. We examined four different thresholds to define when a waterbody is classified as experiencing a bloom. Across these four thresholds, we explored variability in bloom percentage with changes in seasonality and lake size. As a validation of algorithm performance, we analyzed the agreement between satellite observations and previously established ecological patterns, although data availability in the wintertime limited these comparisons on a year-round basis. Changes in cyanobacterial bloom percentage at the national scale followed the well-known temporal pattern of freshwater blooms. The percentage of lakes experiencing a bloom increased throughout the year, reached a maximum in fall, and decreased through the winter. Wintertime data, particularly in northern regions, was consistently limited due to snow and ice cover. With the exception of the Southeast and South, regional patterns mimicked patterns found at the national scale. The Southeast and South exhibited an unexpected pattern as cyanobacterial bloom percentage reached a maximum in the winter rather than the summer. Lake Jesup in Florida was used as a case study to validate this observed pattern against field observations of chlorophyll a. Results from this research establish a baseline of annual occurrence of cyanobacterial blooms in inland lakes across the United States. In addition, methods presented in this study can be tailored to fit the specific requirements of an individual system or region.


### An initial validation of the Maximum Chlorophyll Index (MCI) for the Sentinel-2 satellites across U.S. lakes

Salls, W., Schaeffer, B., Keith, D., Urquhart, E., **Coffer, M.**, Seegers, B., Binding, C., & Stumpf, R. (2019). An initial validation of the Maximum Chlorophyll Index (MCI) for the Sentinel-2 satellites across U.S lakes. (_In Review). 

Given the societal and ecological threats posed by eutrophication, monitoring of inland waterbodies is crucial. Satellites provide a spatiotemporally extensive and cost-effective supplement to monitoring with in situ sampling. Previous work has leveraged various satellite sensors to detect chlorophyll, a constituent often used to define trophic state. The recently launched Sentinel-2 satellites offer a unique package of relatively high-spatial resolution and bands in the optimal spectral range for identifying chlorophyll. Thus, the platform enables greater resolution of more lakes than spectrally rich sensors with coarse resolution such as MODIS, yet potentially more accurate detection thansensors with comparable resolution such as Landsat. In this study, we test the application of a chlorophyll algorithm, the Maximum Chlorophyll Index (MCI), to Sentinel-2 using in situ chlorophyll-a data, doing so at a broad scale for the first time. Results indicate that Sentinel-2 MCI is capable of identifying general chlorophyll levels. However, substantial error (multiplicative MAE = 2.71), and systematic underestimation (multiplicative bias = 0.435) rendered precise measurement difficult. The observed bias may be reducible by using an alternative MCI-chlorophyll conversion. We considered the impact of several factors on Sentinel-2 MCI error; results suggest that distance from shore, sediment contamination, solar angle, and season should be considered. We also demonstrate that Sentinel-2 MCI has the potential to identify trophic state, reporting 46% accuracy but 93% accuracy within one class of correct. This study suggests that Sentinel-2 MCI provides valuable information of chlorophyll concentrations in inland waterbodies.
 

### [Variability in Trends and Indicators of CO<sub>2</sub> Exchange across Arctic Wetlands](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2018JG004775)

**Coffer M.** & Hestir, E. (2019). Variability in trends and indicators of CO<sub>2</sub> Exchange across Arctic wetlands. _Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences_, 124, 1248-1264. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JG004775. 

Arctic wetlands store nearly half of the world's soil organic carbon and are crucial to the global carbon cycle. However, most Earth system models fail to account for wetlands given heterogeneity and uncertainty surrounding the response of different wetland types to climate change. We analyzed summer (June-August) carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) exchange, meteorological conditions, and ecological conditions at four Arctic wetlands. Micrometeorological flux tower data were used to assess CO<sub>2</sub> exchange and meteorological conditions across 7 to 9 years of data. Climate data were used to assess meteorological conditions across 30 years of data. Satellite data described ecological conditions. Each site acted as a CO<sub>2</sub> sink, but strength varied, ranging from -49 to -93 g C m<sup>-2</sup> summer<sup>-1</sup>. A trend analysis was used to investigate how CO<sub>2</sub> balance and surrounding conditions may have changed. CO<sub>2</sub> exchange significantly changed at one site, becoming a stronger sink. Changes in meteorological conditions were variable across sites with the exception of air temperature which, when considering significant trends, unanimously increased across sites. Ecological conditions suggested increased vegetation cover regardless of statistical significance at all sites. A conditional random forest algorithm was used to evaluate drivers of CO<sub>2</sub> exchange. Cumulative precipitation and evapotranspiration were the main drivers of net ecosystem exchange and gross primary productivity, while ecosystem respiration was mainly driven by air temperature, suggesting that projected changes in temperature and precipitation patterns will influence the carbon balance of Arctic wetlands. Variability across sites emphasizes the need for long-term observations across wetland types and climatic gradients.


### [A method for quantifying the number of U.S. lakes with cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms using satellite remote sensing](https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/10767/0000/A-method-for-quantifying-the-number-of-US-lakes-with/10.1117/12.2319669.short?SSO=1) 

**Coffer M.**, Schaeffer, B., Uruqhart, E., Darling, J. & Salls, W. (2018) A method for quantifying the number of U.S. lakes with cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms using satellite remote sensing. _Proc. SPIE 10767, Remote Sensing and Modeling of Ecosystems for Sustainability XV, 1076709_. doi:10.1117/12.2319669.

Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms are the most common form of harmful algal blooms in freshwater systems throughout the world. However, in situ sampling of cyanobacteria in inland lakes is limited both spatially and temporally. Satellite data has proven to be an effective tool to monitor cyanobacteria in freshwater lakes across the United States. This study uses data from the European Space Agency MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer and the Sentinel-3 Ocean and Land Color Instrument to provide a national overview of the percentage of lakes experiencing a cyanobacterial bloom on a weekly basis for 2008-2011 and 2017. A total of 2,370 lakes across the contiguous United States were included in the analysis. Bloom percentage was calculated for nine United States climate regions to examine regional patterns. Changes in cyanobacterial bloom percentage followed the well-known temporal pattern of freshwater blooms. The percentage of lakes experiencing a bloom increased throughout the year, reached a peak around October, and decreased through the winter. Wintertime data, particularly in the northern latitude regions, was consistently limited due to snow and ice cover. With the exception of the Southeast and South climate regions, regional patterns mimicked patterns found at the national scale. The Southeast and South regions exhibited an unexpected pattern as cyanobacterial bloom percentage peaked in the winter rather than the summer. Several environmental factors and potential satellite limitations can possibly explain these findings. Results from this research can help establish a baseline of annual occurrence of cyanobacterial blooms in inland lakes across the United States.

### Acute health effects associated with remotely sensed cyanobacteria in a drinking water reservoir in Massachusetts

Wu, J., Hilborn, E., Schaeffer, B., Urquhart, E., **Coffer, M.**,
Lin, C., & Egorov, A. (2019). Acute health effects associated with remotely sensed cyanobacteria in a drinking water
reservoir in Massachusetts. _Environmental Health_. (_In Review_).
   
## Presentations

- cerf 

[]

[NASA Headquarters Applied Sciences Program: Green stuff from space!](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/NASA_HQ.pdf)

[U.S. EPA Office of Water: An update on CyAN cyanobacterial metrics and drinking water applications](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/just_in_case.pdf)

[SPIE 2018: A Method for Quantifying the Number of U.S. Lakes with Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms using Satellite Remote Sensing](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/Amanatides_Coffer_SPIE.pdf)

Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (cyanoHAB) are a significant environmental concern given their impact on aquatic ecosystems and can be detrimental to human health through both recreational activities and drinking water quality. Satellite data can be used to effectively quantify cyanoHABs, and the highest abundances can be identified on a routine basis for multiple water bodies across geo-political boundaries. We analyzed the percentage of cyanoHAB occurrence across 2,370 National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) lakes within the continental United States, excluding the Great Lakes, for the years 2008-2011 and 2017. The European Space Agency’s MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MERIS) was used for 2008-2011 and the Copernicus Sentinel-3 Ocean and Land Colour Imager (OLCI) was used for 2017. Lakes containing at least three valid satellite pixels (300 m<sup>2</sup>) were included for analysis. CyanoHAB occurrence was calculated as the percentage of lakes that experienced a detectable bloom pixel (cyanobacteria abundance > 10,230 cells mL<sup>-1</sup>). From 2008-2011, initial results suggest that starting at the beginning of the snow-free period each year, between 65% and 74% of lakes experienced a bloom which increased to between 89% and 91% of lakes by the end of the snow-free period. This study offers quantitative insight into the yearly occurrence status of the largest 2,370 inland lakes across the continental United States. Results can assist in identifying lakes with a high percentage of cyanoHAB occurrence allowing for the prioritization and effective distribution of resources to control and manage them. 

[Stormwater Conference 2018: Using Satellite Data to Monitor the Impacts of CyanoHAB Events on Drinking Water: A Texas Case Study](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/Amanatides_SWC.pdf) 

## Posters 
[NC State University Graduate Research Symposium: Assessing the frequency of cyanobacterial blooms in waterbodies across the United States](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/Coffer_gradStudentSymosium.pdf)

**Coffer, M.**, Schaeffer, B. & Mitasova, H. (2019) Assessing the frequency of cyanobacterial blooms in waterbodies across the United States. _14th Annual NC State University Graduate Student Symposium._ Raleigh, NC, March 20, 2019.
**3<sup>rd</sup> place winner**

Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (cyanoHAB) are a significant environmental concern. Exposure through recreational activities or the consumption of contaminated drinking water can have substantial economic and human health impacts. Despite claims that cyanoHAB events will become increasingly critical in coming years, little research exists to quantify the frequency
of these events, or to investigate if this frequency has changed in recent years. This study analyzes the frequency of cyanoHAB occurrence across 2,321 National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) waterbodies within the continental United States (CONUS), excluding the Great Lakes, for the years 2008-2011. The European Space Agency’s MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MERIS) was used to estimate the concentration of cyanobacteria within the water column. Waterbodies containing at least three valid satellite pixels (300 m<sup>2</sup>) were included for analysis. CyanoHAB frequency was calculated for each month of data as the proportion of satellite weekly composites in which a satellite pixel indicated a detectable bloom (microsystis equivalent &gt; 10,000 - 20,000 cells mL<sup>-1</sup>) out of all valid satellite weekly composites. Monthly bloom frequency was them summarized for each state within CONUS. Two nonparametric tests, the seasonal Mann-Kendell test for trend and the seasonal Sen Slope, were applied to monthly
aggregated data for each state to quantify if the frequency of cyanobacterial blooms changed from 2008-2011. Preliminary results suggest a fairly even split across the U.S. with half of the states indicating an increase in cyanobacterial occurrence and half indicating a decrease. Approximately 20% of states indicated a statistically significant change which was also fairly evenly split between those that increased and those that decreased. Quantitative insight into the frequency of cyanobacterial events in can assist stakeholders in identifying waterbodies with increasing cyanoHAB occurrence. These locations can then be prioritized for effective distribution of resources to control and manage bloom events.

[AGU 2018: Assessing the Impact of Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms on Drinking Water Intakes Across the United States](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/AGU.pdf)

**Coffer, M.**, Schaeffer, B., Darling, J., Urquhart, E. & Salls, W. (2018) Assessing the Impact of Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms on Drinking Water Intakes Across the United States. _2018 AGU Fall Meeting._ Washington, DC, December 10-14, 2018. 

Satellite data has been found to be an effective way to quantify cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (cyanoHAB). CyanoHABs are a significant environmental concern. High abundances of cyanoHABs in aquatic ecosystems can be detrimental to human health through exposure during recreational activities or the consumption of contaminated drinking water. CyanoHAB events may cause water treatment facilities to issue “Do Not Drink” orders and increase drinking water treatment costs. We analyzed the frequency of cyanoHAB occurrence across 2,370 National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) lakes within the continental United States (CONUS), excluding the Great Lakes, for the years 2008-2011 and 2017. The European Space Agency’s MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MERIS) was used for 2008-2011 and the Copernicus Sentinel-3 Ocean and Land Colour Imager (OLCI) was used for 2017. Lakes containing at least three valid satellite pixels (300 m<sup>2</sup>) were included for analysis. CyanoHAB frequency was calculated for each year of data as the proportion of satellite weekly composites in which a satellite pixel indicated a detectable bloom (microsystis equivalent > 10,230 cells mL<sup>-1</sup>) out of all valid satellite weekly composites. We selected from all U.S. public water surface intakes (PWSI) locations those that intersected or were proximate to a valid lake. This resulted in evaluation of over 25% of all PWSI locations across CONUS. Our initial results suggest a wide range in the frequency of cyanobacterial blooms across the approximately 800 PWSI locations considered, ranging from intakes that virtually never experience a cyanobacterial bloom to intakes that are nearly consistently experiencing a cyanobacterial bloom. The frequency of cyanoHAB blooms at each individual intake remained relatively stable over time meaning that intakes with high bloom frequency for a given year tended to have high bloom frequency across all years. Quantitative insight into the frequency of cyanobacterial events at drinking water intakes in inland lakes can assist stakeholders in identifying sites with a history of high cyanoHAB occurrence. The locations can then be prioritized for effective distribution of resources to control and manage bloom events.

[NC GIS Conference: Evaluating the Carbon Balance of Arctic Wetalnds: A Synthesis](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/NCGIS.pdf)

**Coffer, M.** & Hestir, E. (2017). Evaluating the Carbon Balance of Arctic Wetlands: A Synthesis. _NC GIS Conference_. Raleigh, NC, February 10, 2017. 

[AGU 2016: Developing Indicators of CO<sub>2</sub> Flux from Arctic Wetlands](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/AGU_Final.pdf)

The study of carbon flux from Arctic wetlands is a top research priority as our climate continues to change. Currently, wetlands are considered to be a global sink of carbon dioxide, but anthropogenic impacts are affecting the health of wetlands which may cause them to shift from sinks to sources of carbon. Despite previous research on the role of wetlands in the carbon cycle, their ability to sequester and release carbon under a changing climate is still poorly understood; thus, wetlands are not considered adequately in many climate change scenarios, and they are underrepresented in global carbon assessments. Scientists have attempted to explain the variability of carbon flux from wetlands through a variety of factors, but more research is needed to better understand the potential variables that may be driving variations in carbon dioxide flux. In this research, we analyze data from fourteen wetland sites in the Arctic region from Ameriflux and Euroflux micrometeorological flux towers which employ eddy covariance methods in order to examine a crucial uncertainty regarding the evolution of the carbon cycle in wetland ecosystems. We first evaluate how carbon dioxide flux and several environmental variables – air temperature, relative humidity, evapotranspiration, precipitation, and the amount of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) – are changing over time. We then investigate the influence of these variables on carbon dioxide flux by constructing multiple Bayesian models. Analysis of these Arctic sites indicate that nearly every site is a sink for carbon dioxide with strong interannual variability. Additionally, there appears to be significant trends among the variables over time with the potential to influence carbon dioxide flux. Through this unique synthesis, we can better understand the role wetlands play in the global carbon cycle under climate variability and climate change allowing us to explore a fundamental cycle of our ever-changing planet.

**Coffer, M.** & Hestir, E. (2016). Developing Indicators of CO<sub>2</sub> Flux from Arctic Wetlands. _AGU Fall Meeting_. San Francisco, CA, December 12-16, 2016. 

[Graduate Climate Conference: Trends of CO<sub>2</sub> Flux in Arctic Wetlands](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/Amanatides_GCC_final.pdf)

**Coffer, M.** & Hestir, E. (2016). Trends of CO<sub>2</sub> Flux in Arctic Wetlands. _10th Annual Graduate Climate Conference._ Seattle, WA. 

The study of carbon flux from Arctic wetlands is a top research priority as our climate continues to change.
Currently, wetlands are considered to be a global sink of carbon dioxide, but anthropogenic impacts,
including global warming, may cause them to shift from sinks to sources of carbon. Wetlands are more
vulnerable to climate change than other ecosystems, and as our climate continues to warm, northern
latitudes are expected to experience the bulk of the warming. Despite previous research on the role of
wetlands in the carbon cycle, their ability to sequester and release carbon under an altered climate is still
poorly understood. Thus, wetlands are not considered adequately in many climate change scenarios, and
they are underrepresented in global carbon assessments. More research is needed to better understand the
potential variables that drive variations in carbon dioxide flux from these ecosystems. This research
examines a crucial uncertainty regarding the effects of climate change on wetland carbon balance. The aim
is to better understand the role wetlands play in the global carbon cycle under climate variability and climate
change. More specifically, this research addresses the influence that several environmental variables
including air temperature, relative humidity, evapotranspiration, rainfall amount, snow depth, fraction of
photosynthetically active radiation (fPAR), and permafrost cover may have on carbon dioxide flux through a
statistical analysis of several northern latitude wetlands. Results from this research will improve our
understanding of the drivers of carbon flux from wetlands while also providing insight into additional
environmental factors that have yet to be considered. This will allow us to explore a fundamental cycle of our
ever-changing planet in one of the most vulnerable and remote areas of our Earth.

[NASA HyspIRI: Determining the Optimal view Angle for Hyperspectral-based Estimates of Wetland Plant Biomass]

**Coffer, M.**, Ade, C. & Hestir, E. (2016). Determining the Optimal view Angle for Hyperspectral-based Estimates of Wetland Plant Biomass. _NASA HyspIRI Symposium_. Greenbelt, MD. 

[AMS 2015: Radar Observations of Storms for Education](https://mmamanat.github.io/images/ROSE_ams2015_nacorbin.pdf)

**Coffer, M.**, Berry, S., Corbin, N., Endries, J, Miller, M. & Yuter, S. (2015) Radar Observations of Storms for Education. _American Meteorological Society 14<sup>th\<sup> Annual Conference_. Phoenix, AZ. January 4-8, 2015. 

Simple 2D schematics of thunderstorms are often used in meteorology classes to describe the structure of storms. While useful to explain basic concepts, these static 2-D depictions of storms are very limited and incomplete descriptions of what actually occurs in the life-cycle of a thunderstorm. Output from three-dimensional numerical models are also used in class to describe storm evolution but do not adequately communicate the complexity of real storms. We aim to complement these resources by building modules on thunderstorm structure based on research radar data. We obtained radar data from the CSU CHILL and NCAR S-Pol radars located in Colorado at the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. Undergraduate students remotely operated both radars in coordinated scans from our laboratory at North Carolina State University. Data were collected from 18 storms between May 20 and June 20, 2014. A scan strategy consisting of a volume scan and vertical cross-sections was executed every 3 minutes. We frequently updated the locations of the vertical cross-sections to maintain focus on key areas of interest as the storm evolved and moved. We use the dual polarization variables collected by the radar to identify the hydrometeor type within the storms. The final education modules will feature three-dimensional depictions of thunderstorm structure, winds, and precipitation type as the storms evolve.